---
layout: post
title:  "44 engineering management lessons"
---

Welcome to engineering management. It&#8217;s fun, it&#8217;s
exhausting, it&#8217;s rewarding &#8212; but most importantly
it&#8217;s new! What worked for you before won&#8217;t work
now. You&#8217;ll have to acquire a new set of skills, and shed some
bad habits in the process. Here is a short guide to get you started.

# Do

1. Attract, nurture, coach, and retain talent. Talk to engineers to
   tease out concerns early, then fix them if you can.
1. Communicate to every engineer the next most important issue for
   them to work on.
1. Be the tiebreaker when the development team can&#8217;t reach
   consensus.
1. Be the information hub. Know what every engineer is working on, and
   help connect the dots that wouldn&#8217;t otherwise get connected.
1. Provide administrative support. Schedule issues, coordinate
   releases, and make sure the bureaucratic machine keeps ticking.
1. Enforce behavioral and performance standards. Fire bullies and
   underperformers.

# Don't

{:start="7"}
1. Personally fix bugs and ship features. You have to write code to
   remain an effective tiebreaker, but that&#8217;s where your coding
   responsibilities end.
1. Supervise the quality and volume of people&#8217;s work. Software
   engineering isn&#8217;t an assembly line. If you find yourself
   supervising too often, you haven&#8217;t attracted the right people
   or given them the right incentives.

# Motivation and culture

{:start="9"}
1. You&#8217;re the one who makes hiring and firing
   decisions. Everything that happens on your team is your
   responsibility.
1. Engineering is a seller&#8217;s market: people work for you because
   they believe in you. Access to their talent is a privilege.
1. Authority isn&#8217;t bestowed freely. It&#8217;s earned by making
   good decisions over time.
1. Don&#8217;t make decisions unless you have to. Whenever possible,
   allow the team to explore ideas and make decisions on its own.
1. Do make decisions when it&#8217;s necessary. Few things are as
   demoralizing as a stalled team.
1. Don&#8217;t shoot down ideas until it&#8217;s necessary. Create an
   environment where everyone feels safe to share and explore
   ideas. The folks writing the code have a lot of information you
   don&#8217;t. Rely on your team and you&#8217;ll make better
   decisions.
1. Building intuition on how to make good decisions and cultivating a
   great relationship with your team will get you 95% of the way
   there. The <a
   href="http://randsinrepose.com/archives/the-update-the-vent-and-the-disaster/">plethora</a>
   <a
   href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scrum_(software_development)">of</a>
   <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OKR">conceptual</a> <a
   href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kanban">frameworks</a> for
   organizing engineering teams won&#8217;t make much difference. They
   make good managers slightly better and bad managers slightly worse.

# Emotions and people

{:start="16"}
1. Management happens to be prestigious in our culture, but it&#8217;s
   a skill like any other. Prestige is a distraction &#8212;
   it&#8217;s fickle and arbitrary. Guard against believing
   you&#8217;re any better than anyone else. The sooner you get over
   prestige, the sooner you can focus on doing your job well.
1. Management also attracts scorn. Ignore it &#8212; the people who
   believe managers are useless don&#8217;t understand the dynamics of
   building a winning human organization.
1. If you feel something&#8217;s wrong, you&#8217;re probably
   right. Don&#8217;t let anyone bully you into ignoring your
   feelings.
1. If you find yourself blaming someone, you&#8217;re probably
   wrong. Nobody wakes up and tries to do a bad job. 95% of the time
   you can resolve your feelings by just talking to people.
1. Most people won&#8217;t easily share their emotions. Have frequent
   informal conversations, and tease out everything that might be
   wrong. Then fix it if you can.
1. Your team looks to you for leadership. Have the courage to say what
   everyone knows to be true but isn&#8217;t saying.
1. You&#8217;re paid to discover and fix cultural problems your team
   may not be aware of. Have the courage to say what everyone should
   know but doesn&#8217;t.
1. Hire great people, then trust them completely. Evaluate performance
   on monthly or quarterly basis, then fire if you have
   to. Don&#8217;t evaluate people daily, it will drive everyone
   (including you) insane.
1. Most intellectual arguments have strong emotional
   undercurrents. You&#8217;ll be dramatically more efficient once you
   learn to figure out what those are.

# Tiebreaking and conflict

{:start="25"}
1. Don&#8217;t judge too quickly; you&#8217;re right less often than
   you think. Even if you&#8217;re sure you&#8217;re right in any
   given case, wait until everyone&#8217;s opinion is heard.
1. Once everyone is heard, summarize all points of view so clearly
   that people say &#8220;Thanks, I wish I&#8217;d thought of putting
   it that way.&#8221; List any points of agreement with each view,
   and state what you&#8217;ve learned from everyone. Then make your
   decision.
1. Once you&#8217;ve made your decision, enforce it. Don&#8217;t let
   the team waste time going in circles to placate disproportionally
   strong voices.
1. Reopen the discussion if there is significant new information.
1. When disagreement gets personal or people don&#8217;t accept
   well-reasoned decisions, it turns into conflict.
1. Most conflict happens because people don&#8217;t feel heard. Sit
   down with each person and ask them how they feel. Listen
   carefully. Then ask again. And again. Then summarize what they said
   back to them. Most of the time that will solve the problem.
1. If the conflict persists after you&#8217;ve gone to reasonable
   lengths to hear everyone out and fix problems, it&#8217;s time for
   a difficult conversation.

# Difficult conversations

{:start="32"}
1. Have difficult conversations as soon as possible. Waiting will only
   make a bad situation worse.
1. Never assume or jump to conclusions. Never demonize people in your
   mind. Never blame, yell or vilify.
1. Use <a
   href="http://firstround.com/article/power-up-your-team-with-nonviolent-communication-principles">non-violent
   communication</a> &#8212; it&#8217;s the best method I know of to
   critique people&#8217;s behavior without offending them. It smells
   like a management fad, but it really works (I promise).
1. Have the courage to state how you feel and what you need. People
   are drawn to each other&#8217;s vulnerability but repelled by their
   own. Vulnerability isn&#8217;t weakness.
1. Expect people to extend you the same courtesy. If someone makes you
   feel bad for stating your needs and feelings, it tells you more
   about them than about yourself.

# Rough edge

{:start="37"}
1. People will push and prod to discover your boundaries. Knowing when
   to stand back and when to stand firm is half the battle.
1. Occasionally someone will push too far. When they do, you have to
   show a rough edge or you&#8217;ll lose authority with your team.
1. A firm &#8220;I&#8217;m not ok with that&#8221; is usually enough.
1. Don&#8217;t laugh things off if you don&#8217;t feel like laughing
   them off. Have the courage to show your true emotions.
1. If you have to firmly say &#8220;I&#8217;m not ok with that&#8221;
   too many times to the same person, it&#8217;s your job to fire
   them.
1. Unless you&#8217;re a sociopath, firing people is so hard
   you&#8217;ll invent excuses not to do it. If you&#8217;re
   consistently wondering if someone&#8217;s a good fit for too long,
   have the courage to do what you know is right.
1. Don&#8217;t let people pressure you into decisions you don&#8217;t
   believe in. They&#8217;ll hold <em>you</em> responsible for them
   later, and they&#8217;ll be right. Decisions are your
   responsibility.
1. Believe in yourself. You can&#8217;t lead a cavalry charge if you
   think you look funny on a horse.

---

_Thanks to Michael Glukhovsky, Michael Lucy, and Alex Taussig for reviewing this post._
