---
layout: post
title:  "How to pick startup ideas"
---

One of the most important things I learned from running a startup is
that on a macro scale the innovation market is efficient. If the
market conditions allow for a startup to arise, it&#8217;s
overwhelmingly probable that multiple startups already exist in that
market. The converse is also true &#8212; if there are no startups in
a given market, it&#8217;s overwhelmingly probable that market
conditions are not hospitable and startups cannot arise.

In this sense startups are similar to biological life. Wherever the
conditions are hospitable, life already exists. The difference is that
startups live in an economic rather than a biological environment.

This has massive implications for picking startup ideas because
technology companies tend to be winner-takes-all. The first technology
company to solve a problem is often worth much more than all of its
competitors combined. So if a company already exists in a market,
it&#8217;s overwhelmingly likely you won&#8217;t be able to displace
it.

Conventional wisdom states that startup founders should work on
problems they or people they know have, but as a filter for startup
ideas this model is far too permissive. Market efficiency implies that
if a problem is valuable and solvable, it&#8217;s overwhelmingly
likely that it already would have been solved. Conversely, if it
isn&#8217;t solved, there must be structural reasons for why solving
it isn&#8217;t possible.

Encouraging founders to work on these sorts of problems is a winning
strategy for investors because the law of large numbers is on their
side. It&#8217;s OK for most startups in their portfolio to be
overwhelmingly unlikely to succeed. So long as the portfolio is large
enough for one or two winner-takes-all companies to succeed in large
markets, a fund will have good returns.

However, this is a terrible strategy for founders, because the law of
large numbers isn&#8217;t on their side. A startup founder
doesn&#8217;t get enough shots to get a good expected value if they
simply look for valuable problems. So a winning founder strategy must
include a much tighter filter for startup ideas.

If you can&#8217;t displace an existing technology company, and
it&#8217;s overwhelmingly probable that the market environment
prevents any given unsolved problem from being solved, how do
successful new startups arise?

Paradoxically, the solution is to stop thinking of startup ideas in
terms of solving problems in the early stages of startup germination,
and instead start thinking in terms of changes in the economic
environment and the opportunities these changes unlock.

Much like the biological environment, the economic environment
isn&#8217;t static. Society&#8217;s moral compass changes over
time. Political environments adapt to social norms and nation-states
adopt more liberal laws. People in developing countries get
richer. Small quantitative advances in technology adoption cross a
threshold of critical mass and turn into qualitative changes.

Changes in the environment unlock startup opportunities. And since
technology companies are often winner-takes-all, recognizing an
environmental change first and getting to market with a viable
solution dramatically increases the probability of long-term market
dominance.

In the early stages ask yourself &#8212; how is the world changing and
what can I do about it? Only once you identify an environmental change
and make sure you&#8217;re not late to market, should you start
thinking about your company in terms
of <a href="http://www.defmacro.org/2013/09/26/products.html">solutions
to problems</a>.

# Competition

Looking at environmental changes to generate and evaluate startup
ideas is a good first pass, but it isn&#8217;t sufficient. By the time
you discover a change, many other people will have discovered it
too. For example, when a journalist publishes an article about a
trend, they will have gotten their information from multiple existing
companies working in that market.

When you&#8217;re first to market with a viable product, your
customers will compare you to the status quo. You&#8217;ll snap up
early adopters &#8212; folks who are on the bleeding edge of the
trend, and if your product is good, the case for more conservative
customers will get stronger and stronger over time.

When you&#8217;re second to market with a viable product, your
customers will compare you to the company and product that got to
market first. If that happens, your job will be orders of magnitude
more difficult. It&#8217;s no longer sufficient to capitalize on the
trend. You have to find a strong point of differentiation with the
first company, and empirically this is dramatically more difficult
than founders think.

First mover advantage is exacerbated by the fact that technology
companies enjoy compounded growth. Building organizations takes
time. Incorporating, fundraising, recruiting, and shipping and
marketing a product can easily add up to many months of work. If
you&#8217;re second to market, your competitor will have been scaling
their user acquisition machine while you&#8217;re still scrambling to
ship your product. They&#8217;ll acquire resources at an exponential
rate that allow them to reach even more customers before you do, and
you&#8217;ll be stuck trying to explain to users how your product is
different from theirs. Most of the time, that means the death of your
company.

# Advantage

So you need to get to market with a viable product before anyone else
does. Empirically, you can&#8217;t do that by out-executing existing
companies. Even in the unlikely event that most of your competitors
are incompetent, just one capable competitor will dramatically reduce
your chances of success. You need to find a trend before others do,
and get started while the market is wide open.

There are no formulas to learning about changes early, but you can put
yourself in a position to get unique insight. For example, you can
learn about changes early because of your job or hobbies. Speech
recognition researchers probably knew that speech recognition was
getting &#8220;good enough&#8221; a few years before I did, because I
only learned about it when working speech recognition products started
hitting the market.

Sometimes your unique background can make you aware of changes that
other people can&#8217;t see. A plausible story about why most of the
population is blind to something, that&#8217;s a reasonable edge. For
example, maybe you think that people who haven&#8217;t lived in the
third world don&#8217;t understand how important remittances are, or
that the third world is just now getting sufficiently networked that
you can do them digitally.

You might also be in a position to exploit changes because of specific
advantages that are unique to you. Some changes can be exploited by
just about anyone; other changes might require deep technical
knowledge or a huge amount of effort that most entrepreneurs
aren&#8217;t willing to put in. Self-driving cars might be an example
of this: everyone was talking about how they were just on the edge of
possible for years, but only Google managed to put together the
expertise, capital, and determination to get to the last mile.

There are other ways to get an edge. For example, if you have the
resources of a large company at your disposal, you might be late to
market and still win over your competitors by having a larger
marketing budget or existing distribution infrastructure. But this is
rare in a startup world. Startups usually don&#8217;t win because of
superior resources &#8212; they win because they recognize a trend and
ship a viable product first.

# Story

Thinking about your startup in terms of changes in the world
doesn&#8217;t just make your startup dramatically more likely to
succeed because it&#8217;s a better model for technology
innovation. It has other surprising benefits.

In the initial stages of a startup you have to talk to a lot of people
&#8212; potential users, advisors, investors, industry experts, early
employees, and eventually journalists. The first question people ask
is &#8220;what does your startup do?&#8221; So communicating what you
do is the first tactical problem you have to solve.

Human beings are wired to respond to storytelling, and all stories
have the same fundamental structure. Here is the simplest possible
framework to tell a story, from Pixar&#8217;s rules of storytelling:

> Once upon a time there was \_\_\_. Every day, \_\_\_. One day
> \_\_\_. Because of that, \_\_\_. Because of that, \_\_\_. Until
> finally \_\_\_.

The first part is the setup. The world used to work in a particular
way, and here is what it meant for people&#8217;s daily lives. The
next part is the change in the world. These parts are only
tangentially related to your startup &#8212; the environmental change
you&#8217;re describing should be inevitable regardless of whether you
start your company. The market is efficient, remember? If you
don&#8217;t start your company to respond to the change, many other
teams will. Your goal is to get to market with a viable product first,
which more often than not will help you establish market dominance.

Once you describe the change in the world, only then do you talk about
your product and company. The change is occurring independent of your
actions. You just happen to notice it first.

The last part shows how your company will transform people&#8217;s
lives. When your startup grows large enough to own the majority of the
market, you will be the cause of the next qualitative environmental
change. In this way your startup will complete the circle of
technology innovation.

This is how the best companies tell their stories. People buy cars
driven by internal combustion engines. But battery technology has
gotten cheap enough that we can build a pure electric
vehicle. It&#8217;s still fairly expensive, so we&#8217;ll start with
luxury vehicles. As battery technology gets even cheaper, we&#8217;ll
go down market. Until finally, we&#8217;ll transform the auto industry
so that every car will be an electric car.

This type of story telling is incredibly effective at propelling your
startup. Early adopters, employees and advisors will be more likely to
sign on because you&#8217;re inviting them on a journey. Investors
will be more likely to respond because this matches their model of the
world. And journalists will cover you because you&#8217;re essentially
doing their job for them.

A good story gives you tremendous descriptive power to explain what
you do to different parties in a consistent way. But even more
importantly a good story is prescriptive &#8212; it informs decisions
and forces you to make disciplined choices. If you&#8217;re about to
make a decision that doesn&#8217;t fit your story, you have to
explicitly choose whether to reevaluate the decision or to refine your
story. Early stage startups get pulled in a thousand different
directions. They&#8217;re much more likely to get killed by
compromises than by committing to a wrong path. A good story keeps you
honest, prevents you from trying to please everybody, and gives you
the mental clarity to go in a concrete direction.

# Exceptions

The notions that innovation markets are efficient and that first
movers are overwhelmingly difficult to displace are controversial
because it&#8217;s easy to think of counterexamples.

Beats Headphones broke every rule in this article and still succeeded
because fashion companies are inherently fickle and
unstable. Microsoft Surface shipped a poorly differentiated product
and succeeded in a fairly mature market because of a huge marketing
budget. Many opportunities remain undiscovered for years and many
deeply technical problems remain open for decades until finally
someone abruptly snaps them up. Even seemingly unstoppable
hyper-growth companies make critical mistakes and effectively commit
suicide.

In the startup world these cases are the exception rather than the
rule. Most founders can&#8217;t swing a partnership with a successful
hip-hop artist and can&#8217;t execute a billion dollar market
campaign on the cheap (but think they can). Startups tend to feel
exceptional because you&#8217;re going off the beaten path, but within
the startup world you&#8217;re less exceptional than you think.

If you&#8217;re convinced you&#8217;ve found an exception, be
careful. Most startups fail at inception and take years to find out
because the founders didn&#8217;t understand efficient markets and
first mover advantage. So think about this model deeply, and
understand it first. Exceptions do exist, but make sure you have a
deep understanding of what you&#8217;re doing. You need to learn the
rules before you can invent your own.

# Self-deception

One caveat to thinking of startup ideas in terms of environmental
changes is that it&#8217;s so effective that it&#8217;s easy to
deceive yourself with early success. Smart and sufficiently determined
entrepreneurs can find evidence for environmental changes to support
almost any startup idea. If you&#8217;re committed to building a food
delivery service, you can always invent a hypothesis, weave a
narrative about your product around it, find credible supporting data,
and polish your pitch until a large number of people believe
it. Unfortunately you will have created very compelling fiction.

This isn&#8217;t unlike the process of undermining the scientific
method by believing in your hypothesis so strongly that you start to
unconsciously reject discouraging evidence. Confirmation bias is
deadly in science, and it&#8217;s equally deadly in business.

It&#8217;s relatively easy to attract a surprising amount of capital,
talent, and press interest to your company this way, which makes the
technique extremely dangerous. I&#8217;ve met people who burned
through millions of dollars of other people&#8217;s money and wasted
hundreds of man-years on projects because they&#8217;d inadvertently
created very compelling fictions and were sufficiently taken by early
success to believe in their own fiction themselves.

So it isn&#8217;t just important for the story to be
compelling. It&#8217;s also extremely important for the story to be
right.

Evaluating the correctness of a story is an extremely challenging art
that lies at the intersection of many disciplines &#8212; economics,
science fiction, history, anthropology, and sociology. You&#8217;ll
need to think deeply about the world and invest years of concerted
effort into building a good intuition for thinking about the
future. Even then you&#8217;ll be right only a fraction of the
time. But you can still get much better than random chance.

# Intuition

Here are some things I&#8217;ve read that have helped my think about
the future. I use them to learn how to put together stories, and to
hone my intuition on how likely these stories are to be correct:

- Reading <a href="http://www.economist.com">The Economist</a> for a
  few months is a great way to get on the same page with conventional
  wisdom. The Economist writers are very good at thinking about the
  future (but keep in mind that they have no strong pressure to be
  correct).
- Peter Thiel&#8217;s
  book <a href="http://www.amazon.com/Zero-One-Notes-Startups-Future/dp/0804139296">Zero
  to One</a> is excellent. Most business books are terrible, but this
  one is the exception.
- Reading <a href="http://hpmor.com">Harry Potter and the Methods of
  Rationality</a> is very instructive. What Harry spends the first
  eleven chapters doing is exactly what you want to be teaching
  yourself. &#8220;The rules are different, there is magic in the
  world. What happens now? Can I get rich from galleon/sickle
  arbitrage?&#8221;
- Similarly, I browse
  the <a href="http://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/HomePage">TV
  Tropes wiki</a> from time to time to help me deconstruct my own
  fiction.
- William Gibson&#8217;s essays
  in <a href="http://www.amazon.com/Distrust-Particular-Flavor-William-Gibson/dp/042525299X">Distrust
  That Particular Flavor</a> helped me think deeply about
  technological innovation in the real world.
- Similarly <a href="http://web.cs.ucdavis.edu/~rogaway/classes/188/materials/postman.pdf">Five
  Things We Need to Know About Technological Change</a> by Neil
  Postman has a unique way of thinking about technology. He&#8217;s
  bearish on technological innovation, but still has a uniquely useful
  way of thinking about how technology propagates.

Once you get through these links, start going deeper.

Learn as much as you can about microeconomics to get a better model
for how the world works. Not just the basics of supply and demand, but
more advanced topics like complementary and substitute goods,
elasticity, marginal utility, etc.

Study history. Don&#8217;t just learn dates and names, but ask deep
questions. Why did the Ottoman Empire never develop feudalism despite
being in similar economic and technological state of development as
European nation-states? Why didn’t the inventors of the steam engine
capture most of the value they created? Why didn&#8217;t the Chinese
civilization end up conquering Europe during its golden ages, when it
was far more developed than European nation-states?

Get a rudimentary understanding of anthropology and
ethnography. Understand <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Emic_and_etic">emic
and etic</a> approaches to cultural evaluation and learn to think
deeply of cultural change.

Cover the basics, and start branching out on your own. Look carefully,
and you&#8217;ll find lessons in the most surprising places. As you
think deeply about the world, start acting. The best way to get an
intuition for how to make good decisions is to make actual decisions
and observe results, so don&#8217;t get wrapped up in analysis
paralysis. Start a company, and start learning from your own mistakes.

---

_Thanks to Michael Lucy for reviewing and contributing to this post._
