---
layout: post
title: "Craftsman, executiveâ€” a tale of two modes"
---

Imagine being a shoemaker in a small village at the turn of the 20th
century. You would know a great deal about running a business-- how to
procure materials, use tools, build relationships, price products,
negotiate, hire, fire, learn your customers's tastes and make products
they want to buy. But you're not the usual shoemaker. You feel the
zeal of ambition and decide to expand. What will you discover when you
start selling shoes outside the small radius of your village?

_First_, you will find that much of what you think about is now
outside of your immediate experience. Before, when you procured
materials for your workshop, made the shoes and sold them to your
neighbors, you were physically present at each step of every
transaction. You could touch the leather, measure your neighbor's
feet, examine the finished shoe, and shake hands at the end of the
exchange. Everything about your process was immediate and tactile.

But as you start selling shoes in multiple villages, you will need to
transition to working with abstractions. You won't be able to meet all
your customers or be present at every store. If you are really
successful, eventually you may not know all your employees by name.
You will have to start thinking in terms of market segments,
demographics, store locations, cash flow and income statements. You
will no longer be able to run large parts of your business through
direct experience-- you will have to think in abstract concepts and
fly by instruments.

_Second_, your decisions will no longer be subject to immediate
feedback. Before expanding, your could learn from your actions
immediately (or at least very quickly). When you made a shoe you found
out in a few days whether it sold. When you hired an assistant, you
learned in a few weeks if they are a good employee.

When you make a shoe in your larger operation, it will take weeks
before you find out if it sells. If you increase the size of your
staff, it will be months before everyone is hired and trained. It may
be even longer before you learn whether hiring more employees improved
your organization. At almost every step the feedback loop is now much
longer-- and so it takes much longer to ascertain the outcome of your
decisions. And it takes proportionally longer to learn and adapt.

_Third_, many of your outcomes will now be probabilistic rather than
deterministic. For example, before the expansion the color brown
either sold or it did not. But in the expanded world you are subject
to the whims of forces you cannot predict or control. Maybe a new
competitor flooded the market with cheap brown shoes; maybe brown is
out of fashion this season in big cities where consumers are much more
trend-conscious; maybe people just got sick of brown.

When you sold shoes in a small village your decisions either worked or
they did not. In the expanded world of selling to a bigger, more
complex market, a decision that worked yesterday may be a disaster
today, and may work again tomorrow. You can no longer rely on
determinism-- you have to adapt to the new fact that many of the
outcomes are now unpredictable, and that the way to model them is
through random variables rather than first order logic.

__Craftsman mode__ is the set of skills and patterns of work adapted
to immediate experience, instantaneous feedback loops, and
deterministic outcomes. __Executive mode__ is the set of skills and
patterns of work adapted to operating with abstractions, delayed
feedback loops, and mostly probabilistic outcomes.

Many people are good at operating in _craftsman mode_ as it's been the
default mode for most of human history. Fewer are good at operating in
_executive mode_. It's difficult to learn by osmosis as the density of
good role models is still low, and we haven't yet developed a
systematic way of teaching it. And of course very few are good at
what's likely the most prized ability of all-- switching between the
two modes at will.
