
---
layout: post
title:  "the future"
---

Can you recall the experience of waking up for the first time in a new
city? Your senses are filled with sights and sounds that you couldn't
easily relay to someone, not without a lot of poetic talent, yet
they're as real to you as a block of wood? You know how you never
quite forget those sights and sounds? If you wake up in this city
again, even twenty years later, your senses awaken all those memories
you didn't think you had in you anymore.

I was born in a country that does not exist today. I was only a child,
but I still remember the world of doublespeak and tyranny, the world
of budding freedom, and the world of tragedy and chaos. Like cities,
each of these worlds has a sound and a smell. I couldn't relay them to
you here, but they're very real to me. As real as anything I've ever
experienced. The smells and sounds that are in the air now are
familiar. All the memories I didn't think I'd remembered are rushing
in.

What I _can_ relay to you is that some of these sounds, these smells,
these memories are not good. Not good for you, not good for me, not
good for the disenfranchised people, not good for George Floyd's
family, not good for the world. The _intentions_ are good, but good
intentions aren't enough-- history is littered with countless examples
when good intentions led to unthinkable tragedy.

From here, the road we're collectively on forks into many different
paths. Some of them lead to tragedy of unimaginable scale, and some
lead to a better world for all of us. Everyone around us-- the
democrats, the republicans, the protest organizers, celebrities, our
political leaders, tech CEOs, Twitter bots, friends, family members--
_everyone_, seems incredibly certain about which path we should take.
But among this sea of certainty I feel incredibly uncertain.

There is only thing I know with absolute certainty, and it’s that
_nobody_-- not the democrats, not the republicans, not the protest
organizers, not the celebrities, not our political leaders, not the
tech CEOs, not Twitter bots, not friends, not family members--
_nobody_, knows which paths lead to tragedy and which paths lead to a
just, prosperous world. All of them are pulling us along with absolute
zeal and boundless energy, striking iron while it's hot, many without
giving a single thought to the sparks that may ignite America and the
planet.

I do not advocate for slowing down the progress of civil rights, or
waiting for a more opportune moment, or for staying moderate in the
face of injustice. All I ask is that we trust our leaders and our
passions a little less, and trust our hearts and our neighbors a
little more.

I am an atheist, but I am praying we choose peace and prosperity, not
violence and annihilation. Nobody knows the future.

